---
layout: lesson
root: .
---
The cost of using AWS services depends on (1) the kind of services used such as compute, storage, networking, etc., (2) whether the *AWS Free Tier* is applicable, (3) whether *AWS Cloud Credit for Research* is available, and (4) the *pricing model* under which services are used.

The *AWS Free Tier* enables you to use **for free** some services within some limits in capacity. For example, if you created your instance in the last lesson using the suggested instance type *t2.micro*, then using your instance will be free for 12 months since the time you opened your account. If you used any other instance type, you will incur some cost.  Similarly, the software environment you used to create your AMI, the Cloud-SPAN AMI, comprises a file system configured to be of size 30 Giga Bytes (GB) in order to be Free Tier eligible. Any size above 30 GB will incur some costs.  Some AWS services are free on a trial basis for some time or up to some capacity, and still other services are always for free. You will learn more about the *Free Tier* as it relates to your instance in the first episode.

The *AWS Cloud Credit for Research*  is credit towards the costs of using AWS services that is available to an accredited research institution, its research staff and its students. Graduate, post-graduate and PhD students are eligible. Student awards can be up to a maximum of US $5,000.00. The amount received depends on the research proposal and the service usage requirements specified in your application, wherein you must also prove that you are enrolled at a research institution. The application process may take between 90-120 days. So you must plan in advance. You will learn more about the *AWS Cloud Credit for Research* in the second episode.

The pricing scheme *pay-as-you-go* is the most widely known for cloud computing and is the one applicable to your account service usage by default. Yet AWS offers other pricing schemes which, under some circumstances of service usage, will be more convenient in terms of lower cost incurred. These include *Savings Plans*, *Reserved Instances*, and *Spot Instances*. These schemes offer from 40% up to 90% discount off *pay-as-you-go* and rely on committing for 1 to 3 years of service usage, non-immediate (on-demand) service (your instance may take long to respond or made unavailable with 2-minutes notice), among other limitations. Also, it is not straightforward to make use of these pricing schemes without diving deeply into configuration aspects of resources and applications. For these reasons, we will not consider these other pricing schemes any further in the remainder of this lesson. We will only consider the *pay-as-you-go* scheme from now on. 

The last episode of this lesson will guide you through two examples to calculate the cost of your instance with a configuration that is not Free Tier eligible using the AWS Pricing Calculator.

